#+title: Deconstructing Urbit: The Politics of Software as Infrastructure
#+author: Lachlan Kermode
#+date: 21 February 2022 
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="/style.css" />

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

The following essay was originally written as a contribution intended
for the Routledge Handbook of Architecture, Urban Space and Politics. I
proposed and drafted it in early 2020, and then submitted it for peer
review. I returned to work on the final edit in July 2021, having not
thought about the work for some six months, and noticed that a new paper
with a very similar thesis (and deeper research regarding the
neoreactionary intellectual genealogies) had been published in April
2021 about Urbit. Not feeling equipped to update the paper to adequately
reflect and build upon that work, having moved onto other research
topics, I withdrew my chapter from the publication.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

I make it available here as a 'preprint' in the spirit of sharing
unfinished academic work I am particularly grateful to Nikolina Bobic
and Farzaneh Haghighi for their close reading of the work in its draft
stages, and their understanding regarding the non-publication at the
time. Thank you also to Chiara Ficarelli, Francis Tseng, all those in
Brown University's STS reading group for their varied contributions in
form and kind. Thank you also to the reviewer two of the first draft of
this piece as it was originally submitted to the handbook, who put much
needed pressure on the more extensive use of Lefebvre's ideas that
existed in early drafts. All editorial and formatting mistakes are mine,
as the piece is slightly restructured in comparison to what was
originally submitted for the handbook.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

[[https://lachlankermode.com/2022.09.21-deconstructing-urbit.pdf][Read
the essay here]].
