#+title: On Stranger Things
#+author: Lachlan Kermode
#+date: 18 February 2022

(If this website isn't rendering nicely or you want to read this
offline, see the
[[https://lachlankermode.com/2022.09.18-stranger-things.pdf][PDF
version]].)

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

The set is small town America, a fictional place nested in real space:
Hawkins, Indiana. The animal print clothing, Kate-Bush-heavy soundtrack
and over-militarized technological anxiety attest to that space's
imagined time: Reagan's 80s, as the Cold War runs out of breath.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

Russia is not the only enemy, however. In fact, it is small change in
the grand scheme of a larger threat. Creatures and consciousnesses from
the 'Upside Down', a dimension that mirrors the world in spatial
equivalence, creep in and render life precarious in all its forms
through fissures known as gates. These faceless monstrosities are kept
at bay only by a young girl with psychic powers named Eleven, who is the
product and escapee of a top-secret government experiment that was being
conducted in a laboratory close to Hawkins in the years leading up to
the show's present. Both the program that produced Eleven and its Soviet
analogue, it is eventually revealed, are responsible for incubating
ruptures to the Upside Down. They are the structural supports that
sanctify the show's bestial bloodbaths, bureaucracies whose ideological
contours enable and perpetuate ST's phantasmagoric violence, its
psychoanalytic perversion and (thus) its captivating plot points.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

This is a picture of Netflix's Stranger Things (hereafter ST), a
television series now with four complete seasons as of July 1, when the
final two episodes went live. (Television no longer “airs”). Unpacking
the entirety of the show's history is a complicated matter for two
pages, so I focus on the episodes released July 1 as a relative present;
though pasts necessarily seep in. ST in general, and these last two
episodes in particular (which together have a running time of almost
four hours), televisually details the extent to which this (our 21st
century space) is a production of a political unconscious that some
would call 'neoliberal'. Whatever we call the zeitgeist, it depends on
technologies of global simultaneity.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

The plot lines are hard to cold start; but when the curtain raises at
our chosen beginning, the unit of fourteen heroes (all American,
naturally) is separated into three groups in geographically distinct
locations: Hawkins in Indiana, the Kamchatka peninsula in Russia, and
somewhere in a desert in Nevada. The unit is, by self-assignment,
collectively fighting a monster who used to be a human, Vecna, to keep
him from killing a fourth teenager. If he manages to commit the
homicide, it will ensure a fundamentally ruptured distinction between
the Upside Down and the nostalgic world of an American nuclear family.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

The Upside Down is, I think, a conception of the future projected from
fragments, flashes of the past. As was realized earlier in the season,
the materiality of the Upside Down is locked in a state years earlier
than the Right-side Up, the world in which our protagonists primarily
live. Vecna's threat to rupture the two worlds is in service of a
(rather unimaginitive) dream; a dream that he and his monsters might
ravage and roam in 80s America. The expansion of his dominion is the
future the Upside Down threatens, and in stellar
capitalist-qua-colonizer fashion it seems (at this stage) to be only for
its own sake. With each new victim, which he consumes as “everything
that they are” parasitically becoming stronger himself, Vecna increments
towards the vision of a tentacle-and-bat-rich wasteland spatially double
to the world he inhabits now.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

Vecna weaves his futurity into the present (80s Hawkins, which is
naturally also a past) by finding sites where some fragment flash of it
already exists. This is in the mental manifestations of teenage suicidal
thoughts, material unhappinesses of domestic violence, or lonely White
suburbia. Understanding it (his futurity) enough to resist its advancing
inevitability requires journeys to the past, journeys which are often
traveled by way of the flashback and other filmic techniques. Another
way to think of the Upside Down is simply as purgatory. It is a futurity
rooted and undetachable from multiple pasts which unrelentingly seep
into the present, a Messianic combustion that enacts violence and makes
way for more of it.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

ST suggests that, in order to keep Vecna's futurity at bay, we are
currently relying on ambitious children. More specifically, on the
ambitious American children who are top of the class in the national
cults of reckless independence, of familial normativity (with just one
unconsummated exception to prove the rule), and of freedom enforced by
jingoistic heroism.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html

#+begin_html
  <p>
#+end_html

Now: it is not jingoistic heroism or heroistic jingoism that keeps the
world's impending collapse at bay. Nor is it the profits of
technological solutionism, whether they are cashed as a psychic
superhero girl, as a sentient AI, or as a global carbon sink. Nor is it
the serendipitous simultaneity of jingoistic heroism, technological
solution, and one or more other Liberal hopes joining forces in
conspiratorial reveal, as it does in small town America in the
penultimate progression of the final episode of season four. The final
scene depicts an environmental line that divides two worlds that are
both the Right-side Up; one which houses happy memories, and the other
which rains ash, storms and earthquakes. I cannot say what it is,
exactly, to progress, but let me say this: human life is not held
together cinematically with the charm of second-rate acting from child
stars who have grown out of their adorability. We will need a revolution
of a different kind.

#+begin_html
  </p>
#+end_html
